
Warm-Up: How Good Are Your Guesses?
Timing: 5 minutes

Task Statement:
Use the actual number of items to calculate the absolute guessing error of each guess, or how far the guess is from the actual number. For example, suppose the actual number of objects is 100. If a guess is 75, then the absolute guessing error is 25. If a guess is 110, then the absolute guessing error is 10. Record the absolute guessing error of at least 12 guesses in Table A of the handout (or elsewhere, as directed by your teacher).

Takeaway:
Compute and understand absolute guessing errors.

Steps:
1. Ask students to guess the number of objects in a jar or from an image. 
2. Collect and display all guesses.
3. Explain how to compute the absolute guessing errors.
4. Arrange students in groups of 2-4, if desired, for dividing calculations.
5. Reveal actual number of objects (47 for the given image).
6. Students compute and record at least 12 absolute guessing errors on handout.
7. Discuss observations about the errors and prepare to plot the data next.


Activity 1: Plotting the Guesses
Timing: 15 minutes

Task Statement:
Refer to the table you completed in the Warm-up, which shows your class' guesses and absolute guessing errors. Plot at least 12 pairs of values from your table on the coordinate plane on the handout (or elsewhere, as directed by your teacher). Write down 1–2 observations about the completed scatter plot. Is the absolute guessing error a function of the guess? Explain how you know.

Takeaway:
Understand that the absolute guessing error is a function of the guess.

Steps:
1. Distribute blank coordinate planes or set up an alternative method for plotting.
2. Students plot at least 12 data points from their class guess & error table.
3. Students write 1–2 observations about the scatter plot and whether the absolute guessing error is a function of the guess.
4. Display the complete scatter plot for all to see.
5. Facilitate a discussion on the scatter plot, highlighting key questions and observations.
6. Discuss if the absolute guessing error is a function of the guess and the shape of the data.


Activity 2: Oops, Try Again!
Timing: 15 minutes

Task Statement:
Earlier, you guessed the number of objects in a container and then your teacher told you the actual number. Suppose your teacher made a mistake about the number of objects in the jar and would like to correct it. The actual number of objects in the jar is \(\underline{\hspace{0.5in}}\). Find the new absolute guessing errors based on this new information. Record the errors in Table B of the handout (or elsewhere, as directed by your teacher). Make 1–2 observations about the new set of absolute guessing errors. Predict how the scatter plot would change given the new actual number of objects. (Would it have the same shape as in the first scatter plot? If so, what would be different about it? If not, what would it look like?)Use technology to plot the points and test your prediction. Predict how the scatter plot would change given the new actual number of objects. (Would it have the same shape as in the first scatter plot? If so, what would be different about it? If not, what would it look like?) Use technology to plot the points and test your prediction. Can you write a rule for finding the output (absolute guessing error) given the input (a guess)?

Takeaway:
Understand how changing the target number affects the scatter plot and absolute guessing errors.

Steps:
1. Split class into groups of 2-4.
2. Assign different actual numbers to different halves of the class (e.g., 50 and 40).
3. Each group calculates absolute guessing errors using the new actual number.
4. Record errors in Table B and plot data points on a coordinate plane.
5. Use technology for calculations and plotting if possible.
6. Discuss and compare differences in the resulting scatter plots, noting horizontal shifts.
7. Conclude by highlighting the relationship between guesses, absolute guessing errors, and the absolute value function.

